---
layout: post
title: "Make a Lisp [1] - 2019 New Year's resolution"
date: 2019-01-01
---

# A New Year's resolution for 2019: Make a Lisp

I've decided to reinvigorate my programming skills by creating a version of the programming language Lisp - `JKL`. This project is a New Year's resolution for 2019.

# Lisp

The Lisp programming language first appeared in 1958, one of four early languages (the others being FORTRAN, COBOL and Algol) that massively influenced the subsequent development of computing technology. By way of example, here is a short Lisp programme that can generate [Fibonacci numbers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fibonacci_number)...

```
(def! fibonacci  (fn* (N)
   (if (= N 0)
      1
      (if (= N 1)
         1
         (+ (fibonacci (- N 1)) (fibonacci (- N 2)))))))
```

A Lisp interpreter is software that can read a Lisp expression, evaluate it to produce an answer, print the answer out, and then loop back to the beginning to read the next expression. This cycle is typically referred to as a read-eval-print Loop, or REPL. If I loaded the fibonacci program into a Lisp interpreter, I'd be able to run the program by typing something like `(fibonacci 42)`, to which the interpreter would respond `267914296`. From the perspective of 2019, it's now hard to appreciate the power of the REPL concept - but in 1958 it was one of the first real steps toward thet interactive computing environments that we now take for granted.

# Making a Lisp

The goal of this project is write a Lisp interpreter (software than can run a REPL). I'm following instructions, taken from the [Make a Lisp](https://github.com/kanaka/mal) website, for creating an interpreter for a fully featured subset of Lisp - `Mal`. The instructions assume a working knowledge of programming and take the form of narrative statements, not code that you can copy and paste. The instructions define a step-by-step process, in which each step gradually adds more functionality to the emerging `Mal` interpreter. The Make-a-Lisp instructions don't assume that you will use any specific programming language to build the interpreter. I've therefore chosen [C#](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C_Sharp_(programming_language)) and [Visual Studio](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-gb/visualstudio/?view=vs-2017), largely because they are similar to the tools I used when I wrote software professionally.

I know that creating `JKL` in C# is doable, because Joel's github includes the [full source code](https://github.com/kanaka/mal/tree/master/cs) of a C# `Mal` interpreter, along with versions of `Mal` written in approximately 70 other programming languages. However, I'm going to try to avoid looking at this reference implementation, figuring out what the instructions mean on my own, without building on the work of the open source enthusiasts that have gone down this path before me. If something completely defeats me, I'll allow myself to look at one of the non-C# implementations for guidance.

In future posts in this series, I'll describe my progress as I work toward completing this task. Just to finish off though, I'll admit that another reason for calling this task a *resolution* (rather than just another side project) is that I've previously tried and failed to complete it. A couple of years ago, I tried to Make a Lisp using the [Clojure](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clojure) programming language. The unfamiliarity of Clojure and its tooling (the [GNU EMACS](https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/) editor and the [Leiningen](https://leiningen.org/) build tools) added too much complexity, and I gave up during the second step.
